The More Public Write-Up:

In testing the current features and usability of animation in
ChalkBoard, we decided to recreate an existing animation. This
was done both to see how close we could reasonably get to the
original and also how difficult it would be to do so. The
animation that we chose for this experiment was an animated
proof of the Pythagorean theorem that can be found on wikipedia at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Pythagoras-2a.gif

This example looked nice, served a useful purpose, and was exactly the
type of animation we would like to be easily created with ChalkBoard.
It also was complicated enough that we felt like it would be a good
test of ChalkBoard's features, without being too complicated as to
require an exorbitant amount of time to create and analyze.

In scripting up this and other examples, a general structure for
ChalkBoard animations has begun to appear. First, the individual
actions of the animation are built up, in a 'let' clause for instance.
This stage consists of building up all of the Active boards that will
be used to show an individual piece of the final animation. This can be
anything from and object moving across the screen, rotating,
fading into view, changing colors, or a ton
of other possibilities. The Active animation language really provides a
lot of opportunities to be creative here.

In terms of the Pythagorean example, this consisted of making the large triangle at 
the beginning, which then uses activeMove and activeScale to shrink to the smaller
triangle. The text was all added later, and simply appears using the 'appear' 
function passed to mkActive, which creates an Active out of a board. We then use a 
list comprehension and rotate to create the other 3 triangles, which appear thanks to 
the 'appear' function as well, but at different times because of the actMove 
function, which can move certain actions further back in time. The next set of text 
then appears the same way as the first set.

The top two triangles are then slide into place, both using the activeMove function 
while adding in faded triangles behind them to give a visual clue to the user as to 
where they both came from. Once they have both reached there final positions, the new 
text is inserted to show the side lengths. Finally, new squares are faded in over the 
top of the area taken up by the triangles to show that the shape can now be broken up 
into two squares of sides 'a' and 'b'. The final text is then added once these final 
squares have faded in.

Each of these individual parts is scripted up as a different step of the 
animation. At the moment, most of the animations we have attempted have been easier
to script up by stringing smaller actions together. These often use some of the same 
basic structures repeatedly, such as the originally defined triangle, which is just 
rotated and moved around a lot to create all of the other triangles in the scene. 
While longer individual animations can definitely be created, it seems to be much 
easier at the moment to keep these pretty basic and then string them together using the 'flicker' function.

Using the 'flicker' function like this is the second major stage we use for creating 
an animation at the moment. Using the 'flicker' function, animations can be strung 
together, one after the other, with the newer animations being stacked on top of the 
older ones. The length of time each individual animation component takes to be 
performed can also be specified using the 'taking' function inside of the list of 
animations passed to 'flicker'. If certain parts of the animation need to appear when 
they start, or disappear after they are completed, this can also be done. At the 
moment, the easiest method is to work the appearing and disappearing action into the 
individual Active board you wish to change, but we hope to soon implement a slightly 
easier way to specify when certain boards should appear and/or disappear.

This use of 'flicker' basically is what manages the ordering and timing of the
individual parts of the animation that were created. It returns a single
Active board that can now be used to display the whole animation (or used in turn
to create an even bigger animation, hierarchically). In terms of displaying the
animation, this will largely be done the same way for most animations. First, the
Active board must be turned into a Player using the 'byFrame' or 'realTime'
functions. The Player is then passed to the 'play' function to retrieve the next
image of the animation (or Nothing, if the animation is finished). Finally, this 
retrieved image can then be used in any way that ChalkBoard can use a Board. 
Traditionally, the image will be displayed on the screen using 'drawChalkBoard' or 
saved into a movie file with 'frameChalkBoard' (possibly both). After this, the 
process of calling 'play' on the Player must be repeated to extract the next image. 
This is usually placed into a simple loop that extracts and then displays or saves 
the returned frame. In the future, we will probably include explicit functions to 
perform each of these most basic cases automatically, though obviously other actions 
can also be taken with the returned Boards if the user desires.








The More Private Write-Up:

One of the bigger issues I've noticed with the current version of the Active
language is that everything starts to slow down as more animation elements get
added. I think this is probably because even though each animation part may
only be active for a short period of time, it still has to be checked/calculated and 
potential drawn in every pass. Whatever the cause, I have definitely noticed a
distinct slow-down in animation speed as more parts of the animation are
added, and so that's probably something we should try to fix or look into. Also 
helpful in this regard would be the reuse of boards, so that animations that are just 
moving boards around and stuff can save a lot of processing time.

Another couple issues that seemed pretty big were the lerp for RGBA->RGBA
and the font support. At the moment, there is no instance for lerp with alpha
(RGBA->RGBA) and that would obviously be a very useful addition in order to
interpolate between RGBA colors or fade objects in or out of a scene based on
a starting and ending RGBA (transparent to some RGBA color, normally).
The font support issue is actually a ChalkBoard issue, but definitely has an
effect on animation because fonts are often going to be used in animations. 
Basically, the main issue with font is how difficult it is to use. Right now,
a lot of our font functions seem to require some arguments that are determined in
a rather arbitrary/guess-and-check way. The biggest of these cases comes into play
when trying to size the text labels that are created. The textures start out with
characters that are way to big to even fit on the ChalkBoard screen, and how much 
they need to be scaled down isn't immediately clear. Perhaps some function could be 
used to automatically scale these text labels down to appropriate ChalkBoard sizes 
when they are created. Right now, in order to scale them down to a reasonable size, 
we just have to guess and keep decreasing the scale value until it looks about right.
Placement isn't terribly easy either, but at least a little bit more obvious once you 
can see the text on the screen.

There are also a few functions that I have used to script up some of these examples 
that should probably be included in the Active language. The 'mkActive' that I have 
used in the pythagoreanAnim example is really useful for creating an Active board. 
You just need to give it a function that takes a UI argument and then acts over 
boards (basically a function that is UI -> Board a -> Board a). The UI here is 
obviously the Active time index, which is 0 until the animation begins, then 
climbs to a value of 1 over a given amount of time, and then maintains this final 
value of 1. This function could be especially useful in combination with other
predefined Active functions. For instance, the implementations I have for activeMove, 
activeRotate, and activeScale in the same pythagoreanAnim example would all be 
incredibly useful for animating these standard affine transformations over time. All 
a user would need to do is decide where they want to move, or how much they want to 
rotate or scale by, and the rest of the plumbing for making that transformation 
happen over time would already be done for them.

In conjunction with 'mkActive', the mergeActive function defined in this same 
pythagoreanAnim example would also be really useful. It allows for other types of 
Active actions to be performed on a previously created Active board. For instance, if 
you have created an Active board that scales some shape, you can merge in another 
Active action, such as moving this shape. Then, the shape would scale and move at the 
same time. This can be done repeatedly to apply a ton of different transformations or 
other actions to the same board. One could also see the usefulness of creating a 
similar function that instead of merging the two actions, would have the new action 
be performed after the original. In this way, a shape could be made to scale, and 
then move, instead of scale and move at the same time. This would allow for 
greater flexibility and ease of use.

In addition to the predefined transformations mentioned above that could be passed to 
these Active creating/modifying functions, it would also probably be useful to have 
'appear' and 'disappear' functions that can be passed in. These would, respectively, 
make an animation element appear once its Active time index was >0 and would make it 
disappear once that index reaches 1. A combination of both would also be good. A 
primitive version of this is implemented in the pythagoreanAnim example.

Also in regards to mkActive/mergeActive, I have now made it so that mergeActive can  
effectively change Active boards that are Pure into Active boards that are Active. 
Basically, all boards can now be lifted into the Active world using the 'pure' 
function and then only the mergeActive function is needed because it will switch 
Actives that are Pure to Actives that are Active. Because of this, all of the 
predefined transformations, as well as 'appear' and 'disappear', and any functions 
that would be commonly passed to mergeActive can now be made into standalone, 
predefined functions so that mergeActive doesn't need to be called all the time. For 
instance, activeMove could just act over Active boards and always add on the move 
action to whatever was already there. If it was just a Pure, then this will create a 
new Active. If there was already an Active function, then this new transformation is 
just added on top of that function.

In another vein, it also be quite useful to re-look at how the timing is done overall 
so that animations can more easily be interlaced--appearing, starting, and 
disappearing at a bunch of arbitrary times, independent of one another. This timing 
would probably replace the current 'flicker'/'taking' paradigm and could perhaps use 
some type of 'from' command to say that a given animation runs from some start time 
to some end time. All animations would then be ran on a single timeline, starting up 
at their specified start time and finishing at the given end time. This timeline 
could still be scaled, however, to change actual run time. The individual animations 
themselves would still need to keep their 0 to 1 time index though, so that the 
Active functions can work based on that percentage. The change from 0 to 1 would just 
be stretched out over the amount of time specified in the 'from' function.


